Well, tell me about the formidable task of writing a biography of Abraham Lincoln.
It must have been daunting.
It's like writing a new life of Shakespeare, almost, isn't it?
I suppose it is, though, of course.
one only writes one sentence at a time.
You know that as well as I do.
So it isn't just when you say, I'm going to write 800 pages about Abraham Lincoln, you start on a much more modest scale of seeing what it is that you want to say.
I came to this project in effect almost by a series of circumstances that were shepherded me in that direction.
As I think you already know, I started in the history business with Professor James G. Randall at the University of Illinois, the great Lincoln scholar of that generation.
And he was finishing his four-volume, Lincoln the President.
I was fortunate enough to be his research assistant during some of that time, so I learned my trade there.
Carl Sandberg had just finished his six volumes of Lincoln.
Beveridge, alas, didn't live to finish his, but he had two enormous volumes.
and so on.
So Alan Evans was writing his War for the Union, Ordeal of the Union, and it was clearly going to be the massive study.
And so I thought to myself as a very young man, this is something I'd better stay away from.
I'm a little hand caught on the main line of the All-North Central Railroad, and all of these big trains are going through.
Let me sort of stick on some sidetracks, which is
substantially what I did.
That is, I have written a good deal about Lincoln in more or less peripheral fashion, and about the Civil War.
But I always stayed away from the main subject, writing about Lincoln's law partner, about Charles Sumner, who was associated with him, about Selman B. Chase, who was the Secretary of the Treasurer, and so on.
A kind of a periphery of Lincoln's stuff, I guess.
All right.
Then there came certain kinds of realizations.
One, that I probably had time for one more large book project, while I'm more or less, mostly less, I think, in command of my faculties, and so I would think what I wanted to do.
Second, that with all these years, I really was not very happy with the books and biographies that do exist,
All of them have decided merits, and yet they did not seem to be, in that kind of stupid way of saying, up to date in terms of the sources, or more important, I think, in terms of the questions they asked and were thinking about.
And I just didn't find that most people that I knew, including the students I taught all those years at Harvard, were reading anything about Lincoln.
They didn't have time to read these
Carl Sandberg said he wrote more than a million words about Lincoln.
Mr. Randall's books are out of print.
Beverage is out of print.
Nicolet and Hay you can find maybe in rare bookstores or book shops.
And I don't think people were reading about Lincoln.
So I thought there ought to be a life that modern students and modern grown-ups could read about Lincoln to learn about the war and about this man.
So that is sort of one set of circumstances.
The other is much more personal, I think.
I don't really take myself all that seriously as a historian or anything else.
It's a job that I work at and try to do the best I can.
But after people were good enough to give me one Pulitzer Prize for the Sumner book, and then very unexpectedly a second one for the Wolf book,
I began to have, and this shows some monomania and paranoia and grandiose ideas, so I began to think, you know, there are some people out there who think that maybe I'm fairly good at this business.
And so, the combination of wanting a new project, the inadequacy as I saw it of the present literature, and the feeling that there were a number of people who thought maybe I could do this.
All these converge to make me say, okay, I think I will try this for a big project.
So for the past seven and a half years, I have done very little else.
I've done almost no reviewing.
I've written almost no articles.
I have not revised textbooks or anything.
It's been all this straight through.
You mentioned that Sandberg did a million words on Lincoln.
What were some of the inadequacies, and not just of his life, but of some of the others?
Well, for Sandberg, in particular, as you know, is a wonderful, rich, juicy, personal, human portrait of Lincoln.
There's a disadvantage that Sandberg was not, and he didn't claim to be, he was not a trained historian.
He had no
sense of testing evidence as to what could be true and what is true and what might be false and what is false.
To be honest about it, Carl, whom I knew and loved, Carl thought anything in print was equally reliable.
If you've ever been to, what is he called, a place down in North Carolina where he spent his last years, you will see in his study
He had all around there things stuck up with thumbtacks, just clipped from anywhere.
It didn't matter to him much where they came from.
If it was a story that was a good story, he would put it in.
He's a storyteller.
That's right.
He was a poet and he got at the thought of maybe the essential, the heart of it.
But I wouldn't go to Sandberg's Lincoln to test any particular fact or interpretation or incident.
because it might be quite sound.
It might, at the end, be from belated recollections that people had made up.
It was all just one thing at the end.
Not, indeed, until after these books were published, it called Ever Look At Manuscript materials, unpublished materials.
So he relied largely on secondary sources?
Well, not quite that old printed sources.
He relied on newspapers, on old magazines, on other biographies, on biographies of other people, life's letters, and so on.
And essentially was weaving a beautiful tapestry, and it is a marvelous tapestry.
I don't think anybody else could do that or would want to do that.
But, again, I don't think it's a place you go to ask, well, what kind of a president did Lincoln make?
What was President Lincoln's role in the Republican Party?
That sort of thing.
So, was one of your tasks to challenge some of what you perceived to be the apocrypha?
Well, I decided I would not go about it that way.
And, you know, that's a perfectly legitimate way of doing it, that is, basically writing a book that
would, to some extent, mop up after all the other people.
And I suppose maybe there ought to be a book, there ought to be a book long after print, a big book called Legends That Libel Lincoln, which is what it's called.
In other words, saying this isn't true because of these reasons, and this isn't true for these reasons.
I decided, first of all, I don't think most people care about this kind of argument among historians.
Professor A says that he thinks that Lincoln ordered the Sumter expedition to sail on April 6, 1861, but Professor B says he has some evidence that he gave informal orders that it should sail on April 4, 1861.
And so they've both written books about this, and then there are articles about their books, and they all disagree, and then somebody else disagrees.
So I don't think most people care about it.
Well, these are factual assertions, but I'm thinking in terms of character, in terms of some of the conceptions that people might have of this character.
You're right.
Well, again, I just simply thought the best way of doing this was not.
to say, okay, here are some stereotypes and I'm going to challenge them and see what I can do with them.
I decided I was going to try to write, literally try to write, as though no biography of Abraham Lincoln had ever yet been written.
And as you point out, you absolutely shielded yourself.
Even though you'd read these earlier works, you didn't refer to them at all.
I did not, particularly my two most immediate predecessors,
Ben Thomas' Lincoln, which is a fine book, I loved it, and Stephen Oates' Larger, Warlock.
And they're both fine books.
I'm just going to take a look at them.
You just keep talking now.
Murphy's Law, it's just not a course.
Things go wrong if they can't.
I decided I would try it as though nobody had ever written a life of Lincoln.
I was going to work
from his papers, meaning the letters and documents he received, from what he wrote, which has now been fully published, everything that he wrote has been published, and from the letters and papers of his contemporaries, from contemporary newspapers, and simply, in effect, say, okay, nobody's ever written about this subject before, this is what it is.
There's some disadvantages to that, I know.
And every now and then I have let myself go in a footnote where it seemed to me it was necessary to say, I don't agree with this way of looking at so-and-so.
But on the whole, I tried to stay away from that and simply to try to tell what I think is a fascinating story that has not been told in this particular way before.
unencumbered by the kind of historian's jargon of Professor A, refused Professor B, refused Professor C, and so forth and so on.
When you start like this, do you start with any axioms, any preconceptions?
What kind of baggage do you want?
One does necessarily, because after all, I've been at work in this Civil War Lincoln field practically all of my life.
The first book, which of course took several years to prepare, was published in 1948, believe it or not, when I was only 28 years old.
And so ever since then I've been off and on working in this field.
So one can't help having some initial preconceptions, some initial feelings, but I tried as hard as I could to say, okay, I'm not going to talk about what I have said or anybody else has said about Herndon, about Sumner, about Chase, about any of the rest of these people.
I'm going to try to see what Lincoln thought about them and what he knew.
That little anecdote that I told at the very beginning is a quite true one.
That is, years ago, when President Kennedy was kind enough to ask me to lecture on Lincoln in the White House, and I gave a little talk, and it was well received, I think, and we had some conversation afterward.
He was, fuck him, he was really very upset.
because a group of historians had been in to see him the previous day, and I wasn't one of them.
They were conducting a poll on the American president.
Who were the great ones, who were the near great, the average, the below average, the failures.
And no doubt thinking about how he was going to stand in the backward glance of history, Kennedy was furious.
He said, you can't do this.
He was telling me this.
He was very polite with them.
You can't do this, he said.
Nobody has a right to evaluate an American president like that, unless he sat in this chair, and he pointed to his chair.
He sat in his chair, sees the kind of mail information that goes across his desk, learns to see the problems as he saw them, and then learns to make the decisions that he had to make.
That's the only way you can do it.
Not even, he said, poor James Buchanan has a right to be judged if they're in your failure.
unless you've done this already.
Well, that stayed with me, you know.
It was a long time, but in the back of my mind there was always that feeling that I would like to sit at Lincoln's side and just simply see how he felt, how he acted, what he knew, why he decided to do this, and as best I could, how he felt as he was going on.
I thought I could do this best, as I say, without the usual apparatus of
As far as the Sumter Crisis is concerned, some people have said A, and some people have said B, and some people have said C, but I'm going to tell you that the real scoop is this.
I didn't want to do that.
I tried not.
You also mentioned that so much material was made available that you saw material that had never, amazingly enough, even more than a century after his death,
How much material is that?
It keeps showing up.
It is remarkable.
A number of things were available to me that I think no other biographer had.
Let's just look for a minute.
Ben Thomas's excellent book was written before the collected works of Abraham Lincoln.
Those, the gray volumes up there, the nine of them plus two small supplements, they had not appeared.
And so he had to use necessarily defective earlier editions and incomplete editions of what Lincoln wrote, what he said.
They were not mostly annotated.
He didn't always know to whom they were writing, why they were writing, or what was written to him.
He also wrote before there was a real chance to have available the Abraham Lincoln papers in the Library of Congress.
Those papers were sealed by Robert Todd Lincoln, Abraham Lincoln's only surviving son.
The story is somewhat amusing, I think.
Robert Todd Lincoln was a rather stiff, somewhat self-importer, but man very loyal to his father and his family.
Albert J. Beveridge, the senator from Indiana who had written excellent, probably still the best, Life of John Marshall, decided he was going to write a biography of Abraham Lincoln.
Along the way, he got in touch with the man who then owned the papers of William H. Herndon, Lincoln's law partner, who had written what was considered a hostile derogatory biography.
Well, when Robert Todd Lincoln heard that Debridge was going to use those papers, he vowed that he should never use his father's papers.
So he gave them to the Library of Congress.
He actually, so I am told, had
an accountant or actuary looking into Beveridge's age and what his life expectancy would be.
He figured out that he would add some years onto that.
He sealed the papers, absolute seal for 50 years.
Well, Beveridge died young as it happened, so he wouldn't have gotten much out of it anyway.
But they were sealed to all historians.
Professor Randall, for example, great scholar that he was, had no access to those papers for his first two volumes.
some access for Volume 3, which came out about the time they were opened, and Richard Nelson Curran, who finished the last volume after Randall's death, used some of those papers in Volume 4.
Thomas had little access.
They were opened practically the time his book was in the press, and so on in that fashion.
So, in that sense, those materials were not available to many of the previous biographers.
Let me add some more current kinds of things.
Out in Springfield for the past, I think, five, seven years, there's been a group called the Lincoln Legal Papers working.
A scholar named Colm Davis is the head of that.
They have been conducting an elaborate and detailed search of all the county courthouses as well as private libraries and so on.
not merely in Illinois, but in Indiana, Missouri, and even in the District of Columbia in the Supreme Court records, for every case in which Abraham Lincoln was involved.
They have collected some, I can give you 70,000 pages of documents, not all of which are by Abraham Lincoln.
That is, if there was a case Lincoln was involved in, they'd get not merely what Lincoln said, but what the other side said, what the judge said, what the jury said, if they were involved, and so on.
But this is an enormous amount of material.
I was the first scholar allowed to use those papers, simply fortuitously, that I came along just at the time they got them all in order.
They're getting ready to publish these, by the way, first on a CD-ROM, the entire thing, and later than that, maybe a three-volume letterpress edition.
I have had better access to the story of Lincoln's legal career than anyone else.
Let me just take a quick instance of this.
We always had reports about how Lincoln was a great pleader in the courtroom, how effective he was, and so on.
These are just the sort of stories.
He was a very effective orator.
But you don't recapture oratory that way.
As these Lincoln legal scholars were just finishing their work, somebody, I think in California, found in an attic, in an old trunk, a transcript.
The only transcript of a Lincoln case.
The stenographer had been employed, who sat in the courtroom and took down every word.
And there it is.
Oh, it's a big, I can pull it out of the pile, a big sheaf of things, stuff about that pic.
what Lincoln said, what the opposing attorney said, what the judge said, what the evidence was, how he made his pleading, and so on.
Is it fairly verbatim?
It is literally verbatim.
So you can really see his language, his style, his thought, his thought processes.
That's right.
And that must have been fascinating.
It's fascinating.
That's right.
What did you learn from that?
I learned a lot about this.
First of all, that Lincoln, an effective pleader, was not a man
who got before the jury and made great emotional, passionate appeals.
He was no Johnny Cochran, shall we say.
Appalling as that was.
His appeals were always low key to this jury, always kept very close to the case itself, never wandering off into broad general matters.
But to be seen to digress here for a moment, it would have been very easy in this particular case
to do just that, because the grandfather of a young man who had been killed in a murder case, the grandfather was Peter Cartwright, the noted Methodist evangelical exhorter, one of the most familiar people in the entire Middle West, whose testimony was taken and presented to the court.
It would have been so easy to get on this and talk about the tears of the grandfather, this fine old man, what he's done for Methodism and religion and so on for the Little West, and just go on and on and on to do a Johnny Cochran, in other words.
Lincoln didn't do any of that.
He brought the man's testimony in against the wishes of the judge.
The judge tried to excriminate, and Lincoln bore in on him point by point by point until he made the judge overrule himself, which is not usual, and allowed that evidence in.
But he got it in in this low-key kind of fashion, so he tells the jury, look, this man was killed in this murder quarrel, but his grandfather, Peter Cartwright, testified, and you have the testimony in front of you, that before his death he said, I really am to blame.
I attacked first, and I deserve what I got.
And that did it.
His client went free.
He walked.
But again, we had no way of knowing exactly how Lincoln
performed in the courtroom until we had documents like this.
On a very different level, those papers allow one to trace the evolution of Lincoln's style.
The early Lincoln legal papers are incredibly verbose with tremendous numbers of to-wits and therefores and parties to the first part and parties to the second part.
It's hard to make any sense out of them at all.
Was he a good lawyer?
Yes.
He was a very good lawyer in nearly every way.
He was effective in the courtroom.
By the way, he discouraged litigation wherever he could, but if he got to the courtroom, he was effective.
He was effective with the jury in the sense that I've said this is basically a rational appeal, not a highly emotional appeal.
He was even more effective, though, and this came as something of a surprise to me, in the Illinois Supreme Court and in the United States Circuit Courts.
There were, I guess there were district courts, actually, there were two of them in Illinois.
Lincoln's pleadings in those cases show a great amount of research and very careful presentation of his arguments and citations of his authorities.
The picture of Lincoln that
most of us have had, and I think I probably had it in some earlier books too, a kind of a homespun country lawyer who, on the basis of charm and popularity, wooed the jury.
This really is not the case.
He was a very careful lawyer who presented his case quite clearly and accurately, and he took nothing for granted on the part of the court using as many citations as he could because he said, I just don't trust the court to remember these, and so if I don't put them in, they won't know about them.
These were very effective arguments, and he was, if you had a batting average kind of thing, he was more successful in these higher courts than he was even in the lower circuit courts.
He was then a very effective lawyer.
He was not a great lawyer in some other ways, and I'd say he was a good lawyer, but I would say he's not a great lawyer.
Make a little bit of difference here.
There were several people, a number of people, and there are in every generation,
in fact shaped the law.
In his generation, this would have included, say, Rufus Choate of Massachusetts.
It would have included David Dudley Field of New York, and perhaps a handful of others.
Lincoln had little interest in legal theory.
He probably never read — Herndon said, I think he's correct about it — he probably never read a general textbook on the law.
When he had a case, he would do great research on that particular subject, and he said he liked the data by its roots and trace it down to the very smallest thing, precedent, that he could.
But he was not interested in sort of abstract theories of justice, the role of law in society, whether law should favor one economic group versus another group.
These were not questions that ever really occurred to him.
He was just not interested in them.
So, in that sense of a lawyer who shapes the nature of law, he was not a Daniel Webster, he was not a Rufus Cho, he was not a David W. Feeney.
What were their surprises for you?
Were there surprises about Lincoln for you?
I wonder what some of them were.
I think probably the one that came as the greatest surprise to me is my realization, which I was fairly late in coming to me.
position I started with and said I'm going to prove this, my realization that Lincoln not merely was very slow and cautious, but that he was essentially a passive personality.
Now, by that I don't in any sense mean that he sort of lounged around and was lazy.
If you look at those thousands of pages laboriously written out by hand,
in the Lincoln legal papers, to say nothing of those ten volumes over there of printed work, you realize this is a man who worked all the time, probably never had a hardworking person.
It doesn't mean he was not hardworking, nor does it mean that he was without ambition.
He was a very ambitious man.
But he had no clear sense of direction.
I think he had no absolute ideology, no steps toward attaining those ideological goals.
that many statesmen do have, if one took— And yet you determined this from what?
From examination?
Just simply, as I worked side by side with him, saw the kinds of pressures that were on him, how easy it really would have been for him a number of times, as I'd take the lead and say, by golly, I'm standing out in front, let us go move against slavery, or on Reconstruction, or on martial law,
And then you sort of look over your shoulder and see who's following me.
Lincoln never did this.
Well, you say working side by side with him, yet this is as you go through the documents.
As I go through the documents.
So you're seeing things absolutely in his hand.
Not merely in his hand, but in everybody else's hand.
So the observations of others.
Right.
What I've got—I'll show you around the corner there—Lincoln's papers.
That is, the 97 reels of Lincoln's papers, which is
approximately, I would guess, maybe 150,000 pages.
These are the letters and other documents that Lincoln received, mostly as president.
There are some pre-president, but mostly as president.
And you will see what people were writing him, what advice they were giving him, how they were nudging him, always nudging him to move, take some action against the Confederacy, send some troops to Fort Sumter, get out of Fort Pickens,
march your army down into Virginia, declare a naval blockade, declare war on the European powers.
Everybody had an agenda.
Lincoln was not in front of any of them.
He listened.
He usually had a little story that he would tell why he wouldn't do this and why he couldn't do that, and he would pass them off.
Not really until forces around him became absolutely uncontrollable.
He then moved.
And when he moved, there was a marvel of timing about it, because when he moved, by that time, public opinion had consolidated.
He was not that general that I sat out in front with his flag looking over his shoulder.
He was right solidly in front of his army.
And this was, I think, Lincoln's great genius.
At what point does he begin to develop for you as a personality?
Of course, the biographer's responsibility is to tell a full life, I guess.
You must be ever mindful of that as you're going along.
Well, I think it might help to talk a little about how this book was written.
It was not written from chapter one.
In fact, I think it's chapter 12 or something like that was my first chapter.
I started in the middle.
I finished it all, including the assassination and death.
Once that was done, then I went back to the earlier chapters.
And I did this for two reasons.
First of all, nearly all of the biographies that do exist, and I've had felt this for many years, slight the latter half of Lincoln's presidency, primarily because the biographer gets tired.
If you're Nicolet and Hay, and you've written seven volumes to bring Lincoln up to 1863, the last two years you sort of give a lick and a promise and say, let's get it over with.
I would not say, and I certainly don't want you to publish anything against Stephen Oates, whose poor fellow he had to take these licks on other grounds as well.
But if you look at his book, you will realize that the last three years of Lincoln's presidency occupy less than 100 pages out of a 600, 700 page book.
And I won't mention those, but you would say he gave him short shrift.
Yes.
Again, I think he got tired.
So I decided I was not going to do that.
that whatever happened, I was going to have the last part of it rather richly researched and written up.
But there was another, and I think a better reason for doing this.
Namely, if you start at the beginning, you're introducing things, and how do you know what to introduce?
How do you know whether this is going to become important or that a friend, for example, an acquaintance, practice a certain kind of law, a decision not to run for Congress,
a decision to leave the Whig Party.
You don't really know, and so unless you include absolutely everything, you may not have introduced what you're going to need later on.
If you've finished your story off at that end, by that time you know what you need to say.
You're going to have to say something, if you do it my way, you would have to say something about how Lincoln exerted
leadership within the Republican Party.
So you go back to the beginning and watch for traces of this and how he developed, how he grew in the Whig Party, how he transferred those talents over to the Republican Party, and how he used and moved to promote himself and the party and so on in the pre-war years.
So that the last half of the book was written, I then went back to the beginning
And I had all sorts of people watching me and reading chapters, and they said, how are you ever going to link these up?
Are you sure?
I kept saying, you know, this is like a spacewalk.
You have a shuttle up here, and there's going to link up with this one.
I hope it's going to be like that.
And I hope it did.
So you say you started with chapter 11, I guess?
I think it was chapter 11.
The one on the Emancipation Proclamation.
These are the fun parts, I suppose, too, to write.
So you started probably with what I would imagine as a writer are the fun parts, because you have him at the height of his powers.
I think that's right.
And these are also the chapters where, in my opinion, significant questions have not hitherto been asked.
Let me try this, for example, skipping for a moment.
The Gettysburg Address.
Everybody writes about the Gettysburg Address, and they should.
It's a very great document.
There's a marvelous whole book on it.
And he examines Lincoln's rhetoric and the sources of his ideas and so on.
He never asks, though, why did Lincoln decide to accept this invitation?
Lincoln, as president, virtually never left Washington.
He made no public speeches at all.
He said it wouldn't be becoming for a person in this position to make speeches.
He just didn't do things like this.
Apart from anything else, he was a hardworking man.
The armies were in the field.
He needed to be there and control.
So he didn't do it.
Yet in this particular case, he did.
Why was it important enough?
What did he hope to accomplish?
Why did Lincoln go to Gettysburg?
I read all the literature on it, and there's a lot of very good literature on it.
You said literature, now you're talking about the published literature.
That's right, all the published literature.
I don't think anybody ever asked this question.
They just don't know.
So, has this question been bugging you for years then?
Is this something that you... No.
As I was working through, and I was getting ready to analyze the Gettysburg Address and all those things that other people have done very nicely indeed, it occurred to me, well,
That is all true, but why did he do it?
What did he have in mind?
Why take this occasion of all occasions?
It was not a particularly auspicious time.
Tad Lincoln, the little boy, was sick.
Mary Lincoln, his wife, was in a state of total hysterics.
She recently lost one poor little boy.
She thought she was going to lose another one.
It was a bad time in terms of military strategy and the state of the armies.
Lincoln himself was not feeling well.
He came back from Gettysburg with a case of varialoid, which is kind of a minor grade of smallpox.
There's not one good reason why he had to go.
And indeed, they didn't make him think he was going to go.
I mean, they were pleased, of course.
And they extended him the invitation, but there was nobody who thought, well, gosh, we can't have any dedication if Lincoln doesn't come.
But, lo and behold, there he is.
And so, what's this all about?
What moved him at this time?
What was it going to be?
Well, did they ask those questions then, too?
No.
They didn't ask those questions then either?
No, no.
Let me shift a little bit.
I've just been asked.
Well, I want the answer of how you found it out.
You had to read my book.
I want you to tell me how you determined me, how you included me.
Let me shift just a little bit for a modern example.
Last week, I guess it was, I was at Fort Wayne, Indiana, where they dedicated a new Lincoln Museum, sponsored by the Lincoln National Life Insurance Company.
It's a beautiful museum, by the way, and a wonderful place to visit, and it's a hands-on, interactive museum, and a fun place to go.
For the dedication, they had invited quite properly Gerald Ford to make some speeches, to make a speech, because he was familiar by Michigan, and Indiana is close, and so forth and so on.
They had also naturally, though, invited President Clinton.
They got no answer from the White House, and they kept hoping at the end, well, maybe he will show up.
But on the other hand, maybe he won't.
We can't build a program about him.
He doesn't show up.
And so they just went on and built the program and were ready to adapt it at the last minute and plug him in in case he did so.
The Gettysburg dedication was something like this.
They got Edward Everett, who was supposed to be the greatest orator in America.
He had gone around the country making orations, and beside that he'd been president of Harvard, senator of Massachusetts, secretary of state, minister to England.
He'd been everything.
And so the assumption was that he will make the great speech, and he written it out and memorized it, all like that.
So Lincoln was asked, so to speak, to come along.
And as I say, he did.
Well, you ask, how do I know why he went?
Fundamentally, it's partly a process of elimination.
It's partly a process of asking what good could be served by an appearance on an occasion like this.
and to make a very long story, quite short.
He knew in advance what Edward Everett had to say.
He did not have a text of Edward Everett's speech, but Edward Everett had been making similar speeches all over the country.
It was essentially a speech that said, we of the North and you of the South are all of one people, all of one race, one tradition, and so on.
We
really need to get together as quickly as we can.
We ought to cease this fighting.
We ought to lay down our arms and negotiate for peace.
With this as the keynote at that dedication, Lincoln realized this might have a very powerful effect on peace sentiment throughout the North.
It was necessary to do something about this.
He couldn't muzzle it or whatever.
Nobody could do that.
He couldn't make a long speech to counteract it or whatever.
Everybody would listen to that.
What he did was, in effect, to change the terms of the discourse, so that people heard Edward Everett, and they were moved, and then Lincoln put it on a different ground altogether.
What we're talking about is not common grounds of race and language and customs.
What we're talking about here is the destiny of freedom on our continent, and not merely on our continent, but for free men everywhere.
And that shifts the whole line of argument.
Freedom and equality become then the Union war-aimed, rather than simply peace and restoration of the Union, which was evidence of war.
Now, did you produce this primarily from your biographer's skill, or, I mean, your instinct, or was it something in the records that you found that convinced you with this?
There are things in the record, but Lincoln
He was a very cagey man.
Nowhere did he say, gosh, I've got to get up to Gettysburg and cut off Edward Everett in the past.
No, he never did things.
There's a remarkable exchange of letters from Edward Everett.
At the Massachusetts Historical Society, they have the original document.
That's right.
They're wonderful.
And they are very polite, and it is clear, I think, from reading those letters, each was aware of what had happened.
Namely, Edward was aware that Lincoln had Trump in his age.
Big time.
Yeah.
And Lincoln was very gracious about it.
Tell me a little bit about being a native of the South, a son of the South.
Okay.
I read some things where you said that, but it is, it certainly is.
I know I went to a reading at the Smithsonian years ago when Walker Percy and Laura Welty
Van Woodward, Southern as all, read from the works of Hawthorne and Parkman and Melville, you know.
And it was kind of cute to see these mid-20th century Southern writers paying homage to 19th century Northern writers, you know.
It was quite an interesting thing.
I know there's some Library of America books over there.
I love them.
Yes, that's a great project.
Tell me a little bit about that.
an intimidating aspect for you?
I shouldn't think it would be, but being a native southerner... I don't think so.
First of all, I'm a fairly fraudulent southerner.
I was born in Mississippi, I grew up in Mississippi, but I left at the age of 20, 21, thereabouts to go away to graduate school, and I spent all the rest of my life in various northern institutions.
That doesn't bring a perspective to it, I would say.
I have a Southern family.
I go back and visit them.
I love many parts of the South, and perhaps have more and deeper friends in the South than anywhere else, because on the whole, friends you make in young life tend perhaps to be more enduring than others.
But I'm also fraudulent in another way, in that my maternal grandfather was an officer in the Union Cavalry.
He fought with Sheridan in the valley.
After the war, he went back to Dartmouth and graduated, and then came south to teach in the Freedmen's Bureau schools in Mississippi.
The Freedmen, after all, lacked education, and there was a kind of a missionary zeal.
What can we do for these poor creatures who've just been made citizens and who can't read and write?
So he established Freedmen's Schools in central Mississippi, a little place called
And he taught there for a number of years.
Then the family legend is always that after a period of years, he discovered that the whites in Mississippi needed education worse than the blacks did.
That's not altogether true, but Reedman's Bureau schools were closed down as Congress refused to pay any money for them.
And he did shift over to the white schools and became superintendent of schools and ran the school system until he died.
I have some way.
produce it if necessary.
A picture of, by Grandfather Belford, that I think is sort of a, has a kind of iconographic significance.
They're in this very modest kind of house, a long, low slung wooden house out of Tacona, Mississippi.
They're standing out in front to have that picture made, because she stood very formally, they were all properly dressed.
Here's Grandfather Belford on one side, Grandmother Belford on the other.
my mother and her little brother bracing them on each side.
They are out near sort of the road, the house in the background.
Approximately five, six steps behind them, a little off to the left, is the colored man.
She is clearly a member of her family, but she clearly on the other end is not in that first line.
She's a little bit behind.
And then the house itself and on the wall is spread
the flag of the United States.
People in, this is 1880s, in Mississippi you didn't spread the flag of the United States.
He's making a statement.
Again, flag of the United States, the position of blacks, proper middle class, now southern white, but of Northern origins.
Okay, this is maybe something different from Walker Percy.
with a great line of very, very Southern, wonderful Southern backgrounds.
That's a very different line.
I don't think of myself as sort of born and bred in the South.
I never in my life ever had a feeling that the Confederacy was such a great thing or when they played Dixie or any such thing as that.
Well, I wasn't suggesting that in any way.
I was just wondering
Because you were weird in the South, there certainly must be some kind of absorbed textures and the nuances.
Well, I think that probably is true.
I guess maybe, if anything, it has made me more understanding of Lincoln's attitudes toward blacks.
As if you grew up in a totally segregated society, as I grew up in,
where blacks were treated really as an inferior order of beings.
You don't find it quite that impossible to understand how Abraham Lincoln could have regarded blacks as not his social or moral equal, that's what he said.
He didn't favor giving them their vote or having them to serve on juries and so on.
Now, I guess if I'd been born in Maine and read such statements as Lincoln, they would have seemed thoroughly outrageous.
Born in Mississippi, they seem actually fairly liberal, because he was willing, first of all, to have seen them freed, and to protect them in basic rights of life, liberty, and property.
So in that sense, I think there is maybe some perspective that might be a little bit different.
I wonder if you could talk just generally about the mission of the biographer, because you've done so many wonderful biographies.
And I remember when we talked about Thomas Wolfe,
I was so impressed by the fact that you disdained applying these techniques of psychobiography to what would, in essence, have been a sitting duck.
I mean, the wolf was vulnerable.
And I would be glad if you could just talk generally about your attitude towards that and how you brought it to bear in your work on this book.
Well, I've grown, I think, in my conception of what it
biography is and what a biographer should do.
Originally I thought a biography as simply an adjunct to history and a way of discussing historical problems on a kind of a case study basis.
I no longer think that to be the case, and increasingly I have come to feel that a biographer's primary duty is to tell a story and to recreate a character just as if he were writing a novel.
It's more difficult, I think, than
writing a novel for the reason that, and we hope this is the case, he can't invent things, he can't put his hero in the wrong place at the time he wasn't there, he can't have him saying things that he really should have said, but never got around to saying, or that he should think he should have said.
But I think the task is nevertheless the same, that there ought to be a kind of a build-up of
empathy for your character, an understanding of how he goes about his task, how he grows and changes over a period of time, until perhaps by the end one has a sense that, my, this is almost like a character in a good novel.
And that seems to me is the primary function, is the recapturing of personality
in a narrative form.
For this reason, my biography is primarily, though not exclusively, chronological.
Namely, I don't jump back and forth.
I don't, in treating Lincoln's early life, say, aha, this shows up when he was President of the United States.
I think that would be a mistake.
It puts you out of context.
If you were writing a novel, you wouldn't, in your early chapters, say, oh, well,
we'll see about this later on, you don't do it that way.
So in many ways I regard biography as sort of an intermediary stage between history on the one side and fiction on the other.
That's quite a challenge.
Well, if anybody ever says, and a few people have been good enough to say, it reads like a novel,
They may not always intend it to be flattering, but I take it as the greatest compliment.
Well, storytelling, to a degree, is important then, isn't it?
It is.
It's necessary to engage the reader.
But, you see, this is not the prevailing mode of history.
History these days, increasingly, is one of a mode of analysis, of breaking down into small... Deconstructions.
often deconstruction and sometimes statistical.
I'd like to address yourself to that at some point, too, your attitude briefly on it.
I don't want to jump ahead.
I'm sorry.
And this is all perfectly proper, except that by and large, you know, most people don't and can't read history.
Whereas lots and lots of people, thousands and thousands of people do read biography and get caught up in it.
And I'm sort of very pleased that
The book hasn't actually been published.
I'm already getting something in the neighborhood of 20 letters a day from people.
Are you really?
Yes, it's sort of wonderful.
And often there are people who read and they say very nice things indeed.
And they say, I don't quite agree with what you said on page 47 because I don't feel that way about it.
And I think in some ways that's the best thing that could happen.
That must be something for a professional scholar, an educator.
who was trained by rigid discipline to be able to write for a general audience.
I think that is so important.
I think one really has to work at it.
You might be just mildly interested in the way I actually work.
Namely, first of all, I'll do what every historian does.
I take notes.
I read every page of those 97 reels of the Lincoln papers, I can tell you that.
And I read many other collections and so on.
I take notes on them all.
My notes are on computer, I can show you here.
They are approximately 12,000 pages of notes there.
So, when I get ready to write, we will say about the Emancipation Proclamation.
First of all, it's much easier now we have computers.
to pull out everything in my notes that deals with the Emancipation Proclamation over that period of time from, we will say, July through September 1862.
I take those notes out together with Lincoln's works and simply sit down and read through them, just literally as though I'm trying to decide was the Emancipation Proclamation issued, literally on a day-by-day basis.
When that's done, I try
put my books back on the shelf, close down that section of my computer, and try to write on the basis of what I remember.
My feeling is that if I can't remember who wrote to whom, what date somebody wrote on, the words that he used, if I can't remember that, having taken those notes in the first place, having just read them,
If I can't remember it, they probably aren't memorable and shouldn't be in the book anyhow.
So you really, when you're actually sitting down to write, you don't have a pile of material?
I don't have a pile of material beside me.
I have a computer screen and I work on it like a word processor.
I'm really impressed that you use the computer as extensively as you do.
I don't see how we ever did without it.
I just don't see how we ever did without it.
I want to go one more step on it.
I sit at the computer and compose, and as I compose,
I then read back my sentences aloud, and if I can't read them aloud with some sense of rhythm and make it easy for me to hear and understand, then I know that there's something wrong, and so I change it, and I change it, and I change it, and I change it, and I read it aloud again.
I think you'd be amused.
When this library ring was being built, I was working on this book, and I was sitting in another room there with my computer.
composing and reading, composing and reading.
One time at lunch, I just stopped for a few minutes, went out of the yard.
I heard two of the carpenters talking to each other.
One said to the other, you think he's all right?
Well, I guess he is, but you know, he sits there talking to himself all day long.
Oh, isn't that wonderful?
Isn't that wonderful?
I don't know, maybe it wasn't all right.
What kind of a software do you have for the notes?
Is it a database type of thing?
Yeah, it's FileMaker Pro.
Would you like to see it?
Sure, yeah.
I'll get a chance to check my tape, too.
You're up.
So you use two screens here, which is... I don't really need two screens, but this came with the set, and this I need because of the large type.
So we'll be ready in just a second.
Okay, now that's just plain old Microsoft Word.
Now these are the actual...
Now, I'm bringing up notes.
Well, you're even using the mouse, too.
Isn't that something?
Do you use a computer?
Oh, I couldn't work without one.
But I don't have anything quite like this.
This is called Claris FileMaker Pro.
And that's a database.
That's exactly right.
So you can search by keywords.
You can search by... You can store by any number of different categories.
Here we are.
Well, 11,000 notes.
And what I have here... You can do this any way you want to.
I have, they're called fields.
This field is simply the date.
It's the date referred to, and not necessarily the date when it was written, but described.
This is a caption that is like a newspaper headline.
Now, you assign these or research it as these fields?
I make these up, yeah.
I try to get like a good newspaper headline that tells really everything that's going to be in that story.
That's right.
Like a headline almost.
Exactly, a headline.
Then this is the source field that tells you where you got it.
And then this is the actual note itself.
Now is that typed in or scanned in?
That's typed in.
I do have a scanner here.
I found it not very satisfactory.
First of all, scanning is not all that accurate.
And second, by the time you get it scanned and you then have to put it back into a language and put it in these notes,
I'm a very fast typist.
I find it easier to do the typing on myself.
But let's just see what kinds of things one we get.
All right.
So what field did you decide to search?
What I did do was just to move from one note to another.
I see.
Oh, look at that.
It's even got a little device.
Yes, it's like leaving a Rolodex or something like that.
That's wonderful.
I don't know whether you can see from there.
I can.
I've got my new glasses on.
I can see it.
notes of any great consequence.
No, but they're there.
One needs to know things like that.
Well, the beauty of being able to access them so quickly, I mean, I have 120 actual notebooks at home, you know, that I keep going through to find these notes.
To have something like this, I think, is so clear, too.
I mean, the fact that you're able to... Now, you see, if I wanted to pull out a
Everything on Lincoln received or wrote on the day after he issued the Emancipation Proclamation.
I would simply have a search for this field here and put in that date, that would be September 2030, 1962, and all of those notes would be bunched right there together, and they would be arranged chronologically within that date, and I'd be able to see what kind of response.
That's wonderful.
So I do keep a hard copy of everything.
Though I love computers, and though I have much in the way of backup, I have this on my hard disk here, I have an external hard disk, I have a SyQuest removable hard disk, and I have one of these in the safety box in the bank.
I do a little less worry, and so I have everything on paper too.
So how often do you print out?
It depends on what I want.
If I, for example, if I wanted to say, you asked me, what can you tell me about Lincoln and railroad cases, I would then have a search, a very quick search made out here, and type in railroad in this field.
So that would have to have been in that field there.
That's correct.
my caption is not good, then it doesn't help me very much.
But that's true of any note.
That's right.
You have to be alert to that at the very beginning.
Exactly right.
And then that would bring me up probably, I would guess, maybe 250, 350 notes on railroad.
And how many different fields are you allowed?
Oh, you can put in almost as many as you could think of space.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
I'm not sure why you want to.
So you're probably limited by a page.
Yeah.
That's a page, I would say.
That's a legal size page.
Let's see what I can get.
I'm sorry.
This is fascinating to me.
I'm getting ready to start my next book.
Let's see what we're going to do here.
These are all my fields.
This is the date field.
Oh, there they are, sure.
Capture your source text.
And you see, I can just keep on adding there.
That's right.
And you can have a miscellaneous.
If, for example, I wanted to have, as you suggested, an extra field at the bottom that might be my commentary on that I could put that as an extra separate subject.
Even when you call up something, you might have wanted to make a comment that you preserve with that text that you see when you get there.
That's right.
That's great.
I just have a couple more questions I'll ask you.